hi this is pressure Locker in the
previous video I asked you what's the
expected number of rolls until a die
shows a duplicate number in this video
I'll present the solution the answer is
it takes about three point seven seven
rolls for a die to show the duplicate
number let's see how we'd get to that
answer we'll think about the question in
Reverse imagine you've already seen a
die that shows all six different numbers
how many more rolls are needed until you
repeat one of the numbers you've already
seen we've already solved this question
obviously on the very next roll you're
going to see one of the six numbers
because there's no other choice if
you've seen the numbers one through six
the next roll will necessarily show one
of those same numbers again but we're
going to put this in a little bit of
notation let's write E of X to equal the
number of rolls needed if you've already
seen X numbers so we've solved that a of
six is equal to one so let's work on
this
what happens if you've only seen five of
the numbers how many more rolls until
you see a repeat we want to solve for e
of five and we can do this based on
knowing a of six it's a recursive
formula so what is e of five there are
two different things that can happen one
thing that could happen is we might roll
one of the five numbers we've already
seen that's kind of what we want so
what's the chance that we're going to
roll one of the numbers we've already
seen while there's a five six chance of
that because we've already seen five
numbers out of six there's a five six
chance that'll take exactly one roll
until we see a duplicate number but
there is the one six possibility that we
get one of the numbers we haven't seen
in that case on that next roll we go to
the state of having seen
all six numbers and then the average
time it will take for us to see a repeat
is e of six so we set up an expression
for e of five in terms of e of six and
the great part is we've already solved
that a of six is equal to one so we can
substitute that and we get EF 5 is equal
to 5 6 plus 1/6 times 2 which means G of
5 is 7 6 if we've seen five of the
numbers it will take us seven six roles
to see a duplicate number and this makes
sense
almost certainly all I mean most of the
time we're going to see duplicate number
on the next role but on occasion we get
that six new number and then we're
certain to see it on the next role so
let's repeat this process what happens
if you've seen four numbers how many
more roles are needed until you see a
repeat we'll set up a very similar
expression for e of four there is a four
six chance that we'll repeat one of the
numbers and that very next role will
give us a repeat number but there's also
a two six chance that we're going to get
a new number and now if we get a new
number from having seen four numbers
that'll bring us to the state of having
seen five numbers so at that point the
expected number of roles will be one
plus e of five since we've solved that a
of five is seven six we can substitute
that in and we can solve that EF 4 is 25
over 18 and now we repeat this process
if you've seen three numbers how many
more roles until you need to repeat we
just need to change the numerators and
the final term that we go to the state
of having seen four numbers so now
there's a three six chance we repeat a
number and there's a three six chance
that we get a new number in which case
we would go to the state of having seen
four numbers since we know what G of 4
is we can
substitute that and solve that ef3 is 61
over 36
now we can repeat this process for two
numbers we'll solve a of two for one
number solving for a of one and finally
we go back to the beginning if you've
seen zero numbers at the very start how
many roles are needed until you see a
repeat and that's our answer
12:23 over 324 which is about three
point seven seven so it takes nearly
four roles for a die to see a duplicate
number thanks for watching this video
please subscribe to my channel I make
videos on math and game theory you can
catch me on my blog mind your decisions
which you can follow on Facebook Google+
and patreon you can catch me on social
media at precious all occur and if you
like this video please check out my
books I provide a description of each
one in the video description